# URLs, and more

## TCP/UDP Remaining questions

### What is pipelining?

* Sending multiple messages at once without waiting for an acknowledgment.
* This is necessary because if each data transmission must _stop and wait_ for an acknowledgement too much time is spent waiting for the recipient's ACK, which contributes greatly to latency overhead.
* Pipelining transmissions can mitigate the latency added by additional waiting time.
* streamlining
* Ensures TCP is reliable but also efficient as possible

### What are the 4 key elements needed to guarantee network reliability?

* In-order delivery (sequence numbers)
* Error Detection (checksum)
* Handling Data Loss (making sure data is retransmitted -> ACK)
* Handling Duplication (delete duplicate data via sequence numbers)
* data integrity, de-duplication, in-order delivery, and retransmission of lost data

## DNS

### What is DNS?

* DNS stands for Domain Name System
* It is a distributed database that translates a domain name (i.e., `https://www.google.com`) to an IP address (i.e., `123.456.123.456`)
* For convenience (people find it easier to remember domain names, not a sequence of numbers)

### How does it work?

* DNS databases are stored on special devices called DNS servers.
* Each of these is a member of a huge hierarchical system and contains only a part of the database that maps domain names to IP addresses.
* When a domain name is entered into a browser address bar, a *DNS request* is sent to retrieve the corresponding IP address.
* If the DNS server that recieves the request does not have the correct domain name, it will route the request up the hierarchical system until it finds it.
* DNS then hands that IP address to the lower level protocols that are responsible for routing the HTTP request to the proper location.

### What is it concerned with?

* It is a service that allows us to utilize user friendly domain names rather than hard to recall strings of numbers like IP addresses.

## URLs

* Be able to identify the components of a URL, including query strings
* Be able to construct a valid URL
* Have an understanding of what URL encoding is and when it might be used

### What is an URL? What is its purpose in the context of network communication?

* Uniform Resource Locator
* A consistently formatted string that allows us to _locate_ a certain resource on the web.
* It consists of the scheme, host, path, port number, and any query strings that we wish to include.
* It provides us with a systematic means of locating resources that we are requesting.

### What is URL a subset of?

* A URL is a type of URI
* Uniform Resource Identifier
* Refers to any kind of uniform string that identifies a particular resource.
  * For example, ISBN for a publication
* A URL _must_ include some piece of data that allows us to locate the resource in question, while a URI does not have this requirement, it only identifies a particular resource, rather than also locating it.
* URL refers to a specific kind of URI in which the formatting has already been determined and it contains the location of a particular resource on the web.
* URL and URI are often used interchangeably

### What are the components of an URL, and what purpose do they serve?

Example URL: `https://app.coderpad.io:1234/KAFWN7FJ?hello=world&coder=pad`

* The *scheme* indicates which protocol should be used to access the particular resource
  * `https`
  * Scheme is different from protocol
  * It indicates which protocol group should be used, but not the specific version
  * Schemes and protocols can be distinguished by case -> schemes are lowercase and protocols are uppercase (`https` vs HTTPS)
* The *host* indicates where the resource in question is located (or hosted).
  * This is written in the format of a *domain*
  * `app.coderpad.io`
  * DNS takes this human readable domain and finds the equivalent IP so the request can be routed
* The *port* is an identifier for the specific process
  * `1234`
  * It is optional
  * If no port is specified, the default of the scheme will be used
* The *path* indicates exactly what specific resource is being requested from the host (if one).
  * Optional if the URL is locating some homepage
  * `/KAFWN7FJ`
  * This tells us we want to access the specific Coderpad running at the location `/KAFWN7FJ`
  * Historically, this has indicated specifically where the resource was located on the server, but with the proliferation of dynamically generated content, this no longer always follows the absolute file path of the server
* The *query string* passes additional information to the server
  * `?hello=world&coder=pad`
  * It is made up of query parameters, which are name/value pairs that are separated with the `=` sign
  * If there are multiple query parameters, they can be combined with the `&`
  * The beginning of a query string is denoted by `?`
  * Limited in use in that they have a maximum length, and are not suitable for sensitive information (as they are plainly visible in the URL.

### What is URL encoding, and why is it necessary?

* A special technique that replaces characters that aren't allowed in a URL with an ASCII code.
* An URL only allows certain characters in the standard 128-character set
* Certain characters are not allowed. These can include:
  * characters that are not members of the original ASCII set assigned to URLs
  * characters that are "reserved" because they have some kind of special meaning within a URL (`?`, `&`)
  * "unsafe" characters can be misinterpreted for a variety of reasons (e.g., `%`, '` `')
* Works by replacing the character in question with a `%` + two hexadecimal digits (ASCII code) (e.g., `%20`)
* The characters listed that aren't allowed in a URL will "break" the URL, in that it will no longer be able to locate the resource in question, and therefore we need a way to safely represent those characters.

### Construct a valid URL

Request a resource using HTTP from the domain ginni.com that is called 'my_resource.md' and limit the responses to those that contain only notes items.

`http://www.ginni.com/my_resource.md?item_category=notes`

Request a resource using HTTP from the localhost with port number 88. The resource is called hello.md.

`http://localhost:88/my_folder/hello.md`

## HTTP and the Request/Response Cycle

* Be able to explain what HTTP requests and responses are, and identify the components of each
* Be able to describe the HTTP request/response cycle
* Be able to explain what status codes are, and provide examples of different status code types
* Understand what is meant by ‘state’ in the context of the web, and be able to explain some techniques that are used to simulate state
* Explain the difference between GET and POST, and know when to choose each

### What is HTTP? What is its purpose?

* Hypertext Transfer Protocol
* The protocol that governs how applications structure messages between each other in the Application Layer of networked communications.
* It determines how requests are made and how they are responded to with regards to resources on the web.
* Provides uniformity to the way resources are transferred. In other words, it is an agreed-upon format on how to communicate

### High level explanation as to what HTTP consists of?

* HTTP request
  * aimed to access a resource on the server
  * client to the server
* HTTP response
  * response to the client's request
  * server to the client
* Together they are a request/response cycle

___

* HTTP is based on the client-server paradigm, in which a client (usually some kind of browser) makes a request through the network for some kind of resource that's stored on a server.
* The server, then, sends a response to this request that ideally contains the requested resource, or if not, some kind of messaging that explains what happened.
  * provide the client with the resource requested, inform the client that the action requested has been carried out, or else to inform the client that an error occurred in the process
* HTTP governs the syntax of these messages, which together consist of the request/response cycle.

### What is the client-server model? How does this tie in with an HTTP request/response cycle?

* The client-server model is one in which the two devices transmitting data over the network each have a certain role
* The client generally describes some kind of web-browser. They are responsible for issuing HTTP requests and processing the responses such that they are readable for humans (such as rendering the HTML of a webpage)
* The server is a remote computer capable of handling inbound requests. Their job is to issue an HTTP response, which ideally will contain the resource requested by the client, or if not, some kind of messaging that explains what happened.
* The server in this model is not limited to a single device, in reality it refers to all the server-side infrastructure that processes the requests and provides the responses.

### What are the different components of server-side infrastructure?

* The three primary pieces of server-side infrastructure are the *web server*, the *application server* and the *data store*
* *web server* = responding to requests for static resources, ie they do not require data processing (CSS files)
* *application server* = handling more complicated requests, such as those that contain application or business logic. Any server side code lives here
* *data store* = some kind of storage construct that can save data for later retrieval and processing.

### What is a resource? What is its role in the general scheme of networked communication?

* Resource is a generic term for any number of things that a user interacts with on the internet that can be retrieved with a URL.
  * This can include:
  * images
  * videos
  * web pages
  * files
  * software
  * games
* It makes up the web
* There are no limits to the number of resources
* A resource is the thing that we, the user, interact with via the client (browser)
* It is that to which all the layers of the networked communication model provide their various services, so that we can see/hear/click/interact with the _remote_ resource from any location via the internet.

### What is an HTTP request? What does it consist of?

* HTTP request is a text-based message sent from the client to server with the aim of accessing a resource on the server
* Consists of a request line, headers, and an optional budy
  * Request line contains method, path, and version
    * method = what kind of action the request is performing (i.e. `GET` or `POST`)
    * path = where to find the resource locally within the server
  * Headers give more infomration. Specifically, the host header is required since HTTP 1.1
    * host = indicates where the resource is located (a server may contain many hosts)
  * Body contains data that is trasmitted with the HTTP request. It is mainly used in `POST` requests

### What are `GET` and `POST` requests? What are their use cases?

* A `GET` request is used to _retrieve_ some resource from the server.
* A `POST` request is used whenever you want to _send_ something to the server, either to transmit data or initiate some kind of server side action
* Without `POST` requests we are limited to sending data to the server via query strings.
* These not only have a length limitation, but also can expose sensitive data.
* A `POST` request, on the other hand, allows us to send larger data (such as images or videos) as well as deal with more sensitive data such as a username or password.
* Typically a `POST` request will be used when submitting some kind of form or other information (such as authentication)
* A `GET` request will be used when clicking on a link or retrieving a resource

### What is an HTTP response? What does it consist of?

* HTTP responses are text-based messages sent from the server to the client with the aim of responding to the client's request
  * Provide the client with the resource requested
  * Inform the client that the action it requested was carried out
  * Inform the client that an error occurred in the process
* It consists of a response line, headers, and message body
  * Response line contains the status code, status text, and version
  * Headers contain additional information about the response
  * Message body is the raw response data

### Give me some examples of status codes and what they mean?

* Status codes are three-digit numbers that signify the status of a request
* Common codes are:
  * `200` -> OK -> Successfully handled
  * `302` -> FOUND -> Requested resource has moved temporarily, and a web browser will redirect appropriately
  * `404` -> NOT FOUND -> Cannot be found, due to client error with request
  * `500` -> INTERNAL SERVER ERROR -> there was an error
  
___

* 200 level -> response successful
* 300 level -> redirect
* 400 level -> client error
* 500 level -> server error

### How are 300 level requests handled by browsers?

* When an HTTP response consists of a 300 level redirect status code, the `Location` header is added to the response headers
* This indicates the new location of the resource in question with the updated URL
* When the browser received the HTTP 300 response, it will automatically issue an HTTP request to the updated URL provided by the `Location` header.
* This, ideally, will result in the HTTP 200 OK response so that the browser can render the resource for the user

### What are the differences when using a web browser versus an HTTP tool?

* When using an HTTP tool, a new request for redirected resources will not be issued automatically, unlike as with a browser
* When using an HTTP tool the body of the response will not be rendered in a user friendly fashion as with a browser, rather the raw contents (such as HTML) will be displayed
  * browser will request all referenced resources
  * HTTP tool will not
* A browser is like Bundler - it manages all the dependencies and an HTTP tool is not
