# The Internet

Study session with Luke
10/12/2021

## What is the internet?

* The web is a service that can be accessed via the internet
* The web is the resources that is being transported
* The internet is the infrastructure that enables the transferring

## What are protocols, and why are they necessary?

* Consist of sets of rules that govern networked communication
* They create an established agreement on how to communicate
* We need them because otherwise the many and varied devices on the network would not have a cohesive and uniform communication method

## Explain how data encapsulation works in the context of a network model

In the context of networking, **encapsulation** is the process of packaging data of a protocol at a higher layer with metadata of a protocol at the current layer, forming a Protocol Data Unit (PDU).
In other words, a PDU of a protocol at a higher layer is *encapsulated* in a PDU of a protocol at the current layer.

Encapsulation enables protocols at different layers to work together by providing separation and creating a certain level of abstraction — the protocol at the current layer can provide a 'service' for the protocol at the higher layer, without concerning about any protocol-specific information of the higher-layer protocol.
This is particularly pertinent when there are many different protocols used at one network layer (e.g., protocols at the Application layer include HTTP, SMTP, FTP, and more; a protocol at the Transport layer does not need to know about which protocol it services).

---

One of the functions in categorizing protocol groups into separate layers is the ability to encapsulate data. Ostensibly, what we are doing is hiding data away within layers, by encapsulating it within a data unit of the layer below. A layer is mostly concerned with it's _header_, that is, the meta-data attached to it's data payload that tells it what to do. It doesn't really matter what the data payload _is_ as long as the header information is complete and the layer can perform its intended function. This means that a protocol at one layer doesn't need to know anything at all about how protocols in other layers are implemented in order for them to interact.

## What is a Protocol Data Unit (PDU)? What is its purpose in the context of network communication?

* Protocol Data Unit
* a block of data that gets transported over the network by the current "governing" protocol
* The unit itself depends on the layer in which we are currently functioning
* A PDU consists of a _header_ which contains meta-data specific to the current protocol's responsibility / service
* A PDU has a _data payload_ which contains the entire PDU from the layer above the current layer
* It facilitates encapsulation of data, allowing each protocol to operate a modularized process, and perform the service that it is allocated in conjunction with the other protocols that make up the network.

**Caution!** higher-level vs higher layer are two different concepts

### How do the different parts of a PDU interact?

* PDU consists of a header, data payload, and an optional footer.
* Header contains metadata concerning the current protocol, and this metadata facilitates the service the protcol is performing for the data payload.
* Data payload contains the data that the current protocol wants to transport. Specifically, the payload is the PDU of a higher layer.

## What is the physical network? What are the characteristics of the physical network?

* The most basic level of the network
* Consists of the tangible physical parts, i.e. network devices, cables, wires.
* Which transport bits in the form of radio waves, light signals, electrical signals.
* It is concerned only with how data is transported across a physical medium as bits
* It's characteristics include _latency_ and _bandwidth_, which come from the physical limitations of the physical infrastructure itself.
* These limitations create implications on how protocols are operating at higher layers.

---

* These limitations influence how developers use protocols in higher layers when building applications.
* Because these physical limitations (i.e. latency and bandwidth) are inevitable, they must be mitigated by the choices of the developer, who should always seek to optimize by limiting their effect as much as possible.

### Describe the different elements of latency and what each is caused by

Latency is the sum of four delays:

* Propagation delay — amount of time it takes for the first bit to travel from sender to receiver.
* Transmission delay — amount of time it takes to push all the packet's bits onto the link (i.e., wire).
* Processing delay — amount of time it takes routers to process the packet header.
* Queuing delay — amount of time the packet waits in queue.

Other important concepts are:

* Last-mile latency - delays that take place at the "network edge", as smaller and more frequent hops take place as data moves lower in the network hierarchy.The most delay is introduced here.
* RTT - Round Trip Time, the time it takes for a single message to get from sender to receiver and then back again. This could refer to exchanges between 'nodes' on a P2P network, or exchanges between client and server.

## What is the Ethernet protocol? What is its purpose in the context of network communication?

* Overall purpose: governs communication between devices in a local network
* Operating at the Link/Data Link Layer
* It's PDU is known as an Ethernet Frame
* Ethernet provides two main functions:
  * (Framing) It adds logical structure to the streams of bits traveling through the Physical layer, and acts as an interface between the physical network infrastructure and the more logical layers above it.
  * (Addressing) Identifies the next network "node" to which data should be sent through the use of MAC addresses. Identifies the intended recipient device.

### What is a MAC address and what are its characteristics?

* A physical, permanent, "burned-in" address for a specific network device.
* It consists of a sequence of six two digit hexadecimal numbers (i.e. `00:01:02:3f`).
* Different kinds of network devices (i.e. routers, computers, refrigerators) are assigned different ranges of MAC addresses.
* MAC addresses work well in LANs, where devices are connected to a central hub that recall their specific MAC address
* They do not work well in large decentralized systems, because:
  * They are physical, not logical
  * They are flat, not hierarchical structure that allows us to categorize them into searchable subdivisions

## What is the primary function of the Internet / Network Layer? What Protocols govern this function?

* This layer is concerned with communication between devices on different networks (i.e., inter-network communication).
* It comes between protocols at the Link/Data Link layer and protocols at the Transport layer.
* The primary protocol that governs this function is the Internet Protocol (IP).

* IP provides routing capabilities between devices on different networks via IP addresses.
* It also encapsulates data in packets.

### How does IP structure data and implement its functionality?

* IP uses a PDU called a packet.
* A packet consists of a header and a data payload:
  * Header contains source and destination IP address, which version of IP, fragmentation data, TTL.
  * Data payload contains the PDU of the protocol at the transport layer

* The IP addresses in the header allow for IP addressing
* IP addresses have two main features that allow for inter-network communication:
  * They're logical — they are assigned as required when devices join a network
  * They're hierarchical — the structure of the address allows us to categorize them into searchable subdivisions. The overall network is divided into logical sub-networks and numbers are allocated accordingly to this hierarchy.

### Why are there two versions of IP?

* 32-bit vs 128-bit
* bit is 0 or 1. 2
* 4.3 billion vs 340 undecillion

### What gaps in MAC addressing does IP addressing fill?

* MAC addresses, due to their nature, are not _scalable_.
* IP addresses, because they are logical and hierarchical, are.

### What does IP addressing allow us to do, and what does it _not_ allow us to do?

* The IP address only gets us in communication with the intended device
* It does not allow us to isolate any particular application or process running on that device
