# TCP & UDP

## What is The Transport Layer and what is it concerned with?

* End-to-end communication between processes
* Specifically, enable multiplexing

* Multiplexing is the transmission of multiple data inputs over a single channel of communication
* This is important because often times, there are multiple applications running on a single device, and yet, with IP addresses, there is only a single channel
* Enables end-to-end communication between a specific process running on two different devices

### How is multiplexing enabled?

* Multiplexing is implemented through the use of _port_ numbers alongside IP addresses.
* Each specific process is assigned a single port, which can be used to identify that same process running on a different device.
* Ip address and port number pair defines a communication end-point known as a network socket
* These sockets allow both IP and the protocol operating at the Transport Layer to transmit data between devices and processes.

### What is a socket? What is its purpose in the context of network communication?

* A **socket** refers to the communication end-point that consists of the port number and IP address together.
* The IP address gets us the correct device on the network, and the port number gets us to the correct application on that device.
* Sockets facilitate multiplexing.

Other things to consider:

* The ability to programmatically instantiate socket objects specifically defined to listen for particular communications (i.e. for a certain application from a certain host) allows for us to implement both connection oriented and connectionless communication systems.

___

* Conceptually, a socket facilitates multiplexing. On a practicl level, instantiation of a socket object in code can implement a TCP or UDP connection specifically.

## What is the difference between a connectionless system and a connection-oriented system?

* A connection-oriented system instantiates new socket objects to establish a dedicated communication channel between two processes on separate devices.
  * This is useful for establishing specific rules of communication (i.e., in-order delivery of TCP)
* A connectionless system relies on a single socket for all communication, doesn't establish dedicated communication channels, and responds to all communications individually as they arrive.
  * Reduces overhead/latency because a connection doesn't need to be established

### How are connections in a connection-oriented system recognized?

* Via a four-tuple:
  * IP and port of sender
  * IP and port of receiver

## What is the TCP protocol? What services does it provide?

* Transmission Control Protocol -> Transport Layer
* A connection-oriented protocol that ensures reliable data transfer on top of the unreliable channels of lower-layer protocols.
* The reliability of TCP comes from the TCP three-way handshake process, which establishes connections by way of message acknowledgement which ensures retransmission of data in case of data loss as well as in-order delivery of data.
* TCP data is encapsulated into a PDU called a TCP segment, which provides five main services:
  * Multiplexing through source and destination port hear metadata
  * Error detection through checksum header metadata
  * In-order delivery, handling data loss, and handling data duplication through sequence number and acknowledgement number header metadata
  * Flow control through window size header metadata
  * Congestion avoidance through monitoring data loss and adjusting flow accordingly

___

* Transmission Control Protocol -> Transport Layer
* Like UDP, it provides multiplexing.
* On top of this, it has features that ensures reliability. Specifically, this is established through the three-way handshake and has 4 main features:
  * data integrity, de-duplication, in-order delivery, and retransmission of lost data.
* There is a lot of latency due to this reliability

* To mitigate this latency and to be as efficient as possible, TCP provides flow control and congestion avoidance.

### What are the steps for the three-way handshake? What is its purpose?

* First the sender sends a `SYN` segment, which ostensibly asks if the receiver is ready to receive.
* Upon receipt of the `SYN` segment, the receiver sends back a `SYN ACK` segment, indicating it received the previous message and ensuring that its messages are also being received.
* Finally, upon receiving the `SYN ACK`, the original sender sends an `ACK` segment, indicating it is also receiving messages from the receiver, and the connection can be (and subsequently is) established.
* This not only ensures a reliable connection between both devices, but synchronizes sequence numbers that will be used during the connection.
* Allows you to build in features of reliability, such as...

### What are the disadvantages of TCP?

* TCP provides reliability at the cost of speed (latency)
* First, there is added overhead due to the need of establishing a connection with a three-way handshake
  * add up to two RTTs of latency
* There is also the possibility of additional delays due to Head-of-line blocking as a result of in-order delivery.
  * Because TCP provides in-order delivery of segments, a single segment that has a delay (say due to being dropped and retransmitted) can "hold up" the other segments behind it
  * This can lead to increased queuing delay.

* It's not flexible as other protocols like UDP.

## What is flow control?

* Provided by TCP
* helps to ensure that data is transmitted as efficiently as possible
* helps to mitigate the increased latency inherent in TCP connections
* used to prevent the sender from overwhelming the receiver with too much data at once
* Implemented via the _window_ field of the TCP segment header
  * contains data sent by the receiver letting the sender know the maximum amount of data it can accept at any given time
  * This number is dynamically generated, and the receiver can lower the amount if the buffer is getting full, and the sender will respond accordingly

___

* Each side of a connection can let the other side know...

## What is congestion avoidance?

* Congestion avoidance attempts to prevent network congestion, which is a situation where more data is being transmitted than there is capacity for.
* TCP implements this using data loss as a feedback mechanism. Specifically, if there are a lot of retransmissions happening, TCP takes this as a sign to reduce the size of transmission
* This is to make data transmission efficient as possible to mitigate the latency overhead inherent in TCP connections

___

* Congestion avoidance is implemented by tracking how many retransmissions are required.
* A lot of data loss indicates there is more data on the network than there is network capacity to process that data.
* Therefore, a lot of retransmissions will cause TCP to lower the size of the transmission window, that is, less data will be sent along the given channel.

Latency overhead: Any latency that is added to the existing latency caused by limitations of the physical realm

## What is UDP? What services does it provide?

* User Datagram Protocol
* PDU -> datagram
* UDP is a connectionless protocol that exists at the Transport layer
* Like TCP, it enables multiplexing through source and destination port metadata
* Unlike TCP, it doesn't provide very many reliability features (other than checksum), which it makes up for with its speed and flexibility
* Speed:
  * UDP provides speed because it doesn't establish a connection (it's connectionless)
  * There is also no Head-of-line blocking as there is no in-order delivery.
  * One way data flow of a connectionless system means less latency (no acknowledgements)
  
* Flexibility
  * UDP is a base that programmers can build upon. They can add features as desired at the Application layer.
  * Specifics of what type of reliability functions to include are left up to the developer to implement at the Application level.
  
### What is the PDU for UDP and how is it structured?

* datagram
* headers:
  * source port and destination port which provides for multiplexing and socket routing
  * length
  * checksum
* data payload:
  * encapsulated HTTP request/response
  
### What are some use cased for UDP over TCP?

* Any application that prioritizes speed and flexibility
* Video calling applications like Zoom
  * Prioritizes speed over occasional lost data
* First-person shooter games

## Which protocols distinguish the client from the server?

* HTTP is the only protocol that distinguishes the client from the server?
* Request -> client
  Response -> server
