# HTTP and more

## Topics of interest

* Be able to explain what HTTP requests and responses are, and identify the components of each
* Be able to describe the HTTP request/response cycle
* Be able to explain what status codes are, and provide examples of different status code types
* Understand what is meant by 'state' in the context of the web, and be able to explain some techniques that are used to simulate state
* Explain the difference between GET and POST, and know when to choose each
* *Understand the client-server model of web interactions, and the role of HTTP as a protocol within that model*

## HTTP

### What are request methods?

* A request method is part of the _request line_ of an HTTP request and it describes the type of request that is being made
* For example, a `GET` request might be made oto fetch a certain resource and a `POST` request might be made to send some data to the server

___

* Verb command that tells the server what action it should preform on a resource
* a `GET` request is used to *retrieve* a resource on the server
* a `POST` request is used to send data and *create/update* a resource on the server
  * Sending a username/password is creating a session (which is a resource)

### Describe statelessness and its trade offs

* stateful web application maintains knowledge of past interactions
  * reddit
  * shopping carts
* HTTP is a stateless protocol — each request/response cycle is independent of one other
  * each cycle has no effect on the preceding or subsequent cycles
* stateless protocols are resilient and fast
  * server doesn't have to retain any information between each request/response cycle (resilience)
  * no part of the system has to do any clean up (speed)
* it's very hard to simulate a stateful experience

### What are mechanisms that are used to simulate state?

* **Sessions** - a means of identifying a specific client to a server so that it can be made to _seem_ a persistent connection exists between HTTP requests/responses
  * The server assigns some kind of unique `session id` to the client.
  * Then, the client includes that `session id` in each request it makes, this allows the server to identify individual clients, preserving data associated with each identity.
  * CONS:
    * Difficult to maintain
    * because each HTTP request must be analyzed for a `session id`
    * each `session id` has to be validated
    * server needs to figure out how to handle invalid ids
    * how to store and retrieve data associated with each `session id`
    * server needs to recreate the state from whatever data it has stored when sending back a response

* **Cookies** - a way for the browser (client) to store data sent from the server that helps maintain the appearance of persistent application state.
  * Small files stored in the browser that contain information about the `session id`.
  * These files are stored even if the browser is closed or shut down, which enables a longer and more consistent appearance of state.
  * This information is sent with each request to the server, then used to "unlock" the correct stored session data
  * Allows the server to recreate the correct state of the application
  * Allows the session to be recognized each time a website is visited, even if some time has passed.

* **AJAX** - **Asynchronous JavaScript and XML**
  * What allows browsers to issue requests and process responses without having to refresh the current page
  * AJAX requests are sent like normal HTTP requests, and the server responds to them with a normal HTTP response
  * BUT the browser will process these responses with a _callback function_ rather than refreshing and processing the HTTP response
  * Allows the client to send and retrieve information is small pieces that can be used to update the state of an application without reloading the whole complicated thing (easier to maintain state)
  
### Is HTTP secure? Why or why not?

* HTTP is not secure because they are essentially text-based messages
* Because they are insecure, attackers can employ techniques like packet sniffing to obtain information
* Using HTTPS, which utilizes TLS to ensure a secure connection helps with this

### What is session hijacking? What measures can be taken to prevent this?

* **Session Hijacking** is a malignant action in which a hacker utilizes a stolen `session id` to authenticate themselves and share sessions.
* Because a client's individual `session id` is used to log a user in, gaining access to this can allow a hacker to log in as the user without ever having to know their username or password.
* Prevention measures:
  * Can be mitigates by frequently resetting session (i.e. making sure users re-authenticate when doing anything sensitive)
  * Putting an expiration time on sessions to give attackers a narrower window for access

### What are some other ways to mitigate the lack of security in HTTP?

* Designing for the **same origin policy**
  * Same-origin policy permits interactions between resources of the same origin, but restricts certain interactions between resources of different origins
  * 'Same-origin' means same scheme, host, and port
  * This prevents attackers from using this mechanism to access session information, or other sensitive information
* Protecting against **cross site scripting (XSS)**
  * When a malicious party uses site input fields to inject HTML or JavaScript into the site directly
  * This can be prevented by performing _input sanitation_, bu getting rid of anything that might be problematic like `<script>` tags.
  * Escape certain characters that indicate JavaScript or HTML code
  
## TLS

### Topics of interest

* Be aware of the different services that TLS can provide, and have a broad understanding of each of those services

### What is the TLS protocol, and what is its purpose?

* TLS = **Transport Layer Security**
* It is a protocol that utilizes cryptography to provide more secure communications between networked applications.
* It is that which provides the security aspect of HTTPS
* It consists of both the TLS record and the TLS handshake

Why do we need TLS:

* Because HTTP is a text based protocol, it is inherently insecure.
* Any intercepted requests/responses are easy to read. Furthermore, HTTP is a fairly simple protocol, concerned only with basic message structure.
* It provides no check for whether or not the source of an HTTP response is trustworthy, nor does it provide a means of determining if messages are being tampered with in transit.

Purpose:

* TLS enables us to provide encryption to the inherently insecure plain text of the HTTP protocol
* Provides authentication services, checking to see if the source of an HTTP response is trustworthy
* Provides a means of ensuring data integrity, that is, determining whether or not HTTP messages have been tampered with

___

* Exists between protocols of the Application layer and Transport layer

### What are the three services that TLS provides? Describe each

* Encryption allows HTTP messages to be encoded in such a way that only the intended recipient can decode the message
  * This secure channel is established with the TLS handshake, which uses both symmetric and asymmetric key encryption
  * It encrypts, but adds several round-trips of latency which impacts performance
* Authentication is a means of verifying the identity of the participant in a message exchange, to ensure the source of an HTTP response is trustworthy so the provided resource can be safely processed
  * Implemented with Digital Certificates, which are signed by a chain of Certificate Authorities
  * Certificates are exchanged during the TLS handshake
* Integrity ensures that the message hasn't been altered or interfered
  * It is different from checksum, because it is more than just checking for errors (data corruption)
  * It ensures that the message hasn't been tampered with
  * It uses Message Authentication Codes (MAC)

### Give a general overview of the TLS handshake

* The TLS Handshake is a special process that takes place after the TCP Handshake, where client and server exchange encryption keys.
* This exchange allows both parties to communicate via encrypted messages, thus giving a security advantage over the inherently insecure messages of HTTP
* The encryption key exchange is accomplished via asymmetric key encryption.
* Once the encryptions keys are exchanged in the handshake, communication via symmetric encryptions between the client and the server can commence.
* The TLS handshake also provides a means by which the two devices can decide on which TLS version should be used for the connection, as well as which algorithms should be used in the cipher suite.
* The TLS Handshake consists of the following steps:
  * `ClientHello` = client sends the max version of TLS protocol it supports and a list of available cipher suites
  * `ServerHello` = server responds with a decision re: TLS version and cipher suite. Includes its certificate and public key. Ends with `ServerHelloDone` marker
  * Client initiates symmetric key exchange process, using the server's public key for asymmetric key encryption
  * Once the keys have been exchanged, the server sends a ready-to-go message using the symmetric key and secure message exchange commences.
* Because the TLS handshake is a complex process that can add two RTT it has an impact on speed and performance.

### What is Symmetric Key Encryption? What is Asymmetric Key Encryption? What are the advantages and drawbacks of each?

* Symmetric key encryption is when the sender and receiver share a common encryption key
  * Advantage: provides for secure two-way communication
  * Drawback: they need to find a way to securely exchange symmetric keys, which isn't always easy over the internet
* Asymmetric key encryption uses a pair of keys: a public key and a private key.
* They are non-identical and the public key is used to encrypt and the private key is used to decrypt
  * Advantage: securely exchange symmetric keys
  * Drawback: only facilitates one way communication

### What is a cipher suite?

* A **cipher suite** is the set of _ciphers_ (i.e. cryptographic algorithms) that are used for encryption, decryption, and other security tasks.
* In general, we want to have a distinct algorithm (cipher) for each task during secure communication
* This might include performing the key exchange, symmetric key encryption, and checking message integrity
* Hosts agree on a cipher suite they will use during secure communication during the TLS handshake process

### How does TLS Authentication work?

* TLS authentication is a means of verifying the identify of the sender of the message
* It uses digital certificates, which are provided by the server during the TLS handshake
* The certificate includes a Public Key, and a signature (data encrypted with the private key), and the original data that was used to create the signature
* Upon receipt, the receiver decrypts the signature with the public key and checks that it matches the original data
* The certificate that the server sends is signed by Certificate Authorities, to verify that the party is who they say they are
* The digital certificate the server provides is considered to be trustworthy on the basis of the issuing certificate authority.

### What are Certificate Authorities and the Chain of Trust?

* Certificate Authorities are trustworthy sources that issue certificates used by servers to establish authentication
* We use certificates provided by these authorities to ensure that the certificate in question (servers) is not being faked
* Certificate authorities exist in a hierarchy known as the "chain of trust"
* Within this hierarchy, the certificate for lower level authorities is signed by the CA one level above it
* At the top of the chain there exists a Root CA whose certificate is "self-signed"
* These consists of a small group of organizations who have proved their high level trustworthiness through prominence and longevity.

### How does TLS Integrity work?

* TLS integrity makes sure that a message hasn't been altered with or interfered with during transit
* This is done with the Message Authentication Code (MAC)
* Sender creates a digest of the data payload with a hashing algorithm (pre-agreed upon in the TLS handshake)
* Encrypt this data with the symmetric key and sends it to the receiver
* Receiver decrypts the data with the symmetric key, creates a digest with the same pre-agreed upon hashing algorithm, and checks if the two match

___

* Data that is being exchanged via HTTP is encapsulated into a PDU (record) for TLS
* The relevant metadata here is the MAC, which is how the protocol checks to see if the message is still good

### What is DTLS and why do we need it?

* **Datagram Transport Layer Security**
* A separate protocol _based on_ TLS that is used with network connections that utilize UDP instead of TCP
* Because TLS is interlinked with TCP and the TCP handshake, separate protocols are needed to meet the security requirements of UDP
